.SA 1
.ND "\*(DT"
.DS
Mike Rumore
CSC 669
Lab Report
.DE
.H 1 "Lab Description"
.P
A network consisting of three workstations, one user terminal, and
a file server was simulated using NETWORK II.5. The stations were
running a module for reading a file, editing the file, and closing
the file. The user terminal was running a module which sent start
messages to each station. The LAN was defined to execute the protocol
IEEE 802.3 CSMA/CD 10BASET. Appendix 1 lists the input parameters for
the network described in the lab assignment.
.H 1 "Part 1 Reports"
.P
The following sections described briefly some of the reports generated
for network described in the first part of the lab. Appendix 1 lists
the input parameters for the part 1 network.
.H 2 "Processing Element Utilization Statistics"
.P
This report is displayed in appendix 2. The report lists the number
of requests issued and how many attempts it took for the request
to be fulfilled. For example, looking at station A, this station
issued 57 requests, but it took 178 attempts to satisfy the requests
because of collisions. The average waiting time was 256 microseconds.
The station had a utilization of 10.8 percent. This would indicate
that the station was not very busy. The numbers are similar for 
stations B and C.
.H 2 "Transfer Device Utilization Statistics"
.P
This report is displayed in appendix 3. The report lists statistics
on the LAN performance. The report indicates that each request
for the LAN was subjected to an average of 2.4 collisions before
the request was fulfilled. The average time a station had to wait
before access to the LAN was granted was 539 microseconds. The percent
utilization of 13 percent indicates a LAN which is not under a very
heavy load. 
.H 2 "Complete Module Statistics"
.P
This report is displayed in appendix 4. This report lists the 
execution times for each module on each processor element. For
example, the Station Module was executed 25 times on station A.
The average execution time was 4276 microseconds. The maximum
time for execution was 9394 microseconds. A large part of the 
delay is probably caused by delays in accessing the LAN. The delays
are caused by collisions.
.H 2 "Received Message Report"
.P
The final report for part 1 is displayed in appecndix 5. This report
lists how many messages were lost by each processor element. It is
immediately obvious that the USR-D processor has lost 74 out of 75
messages sent to it from stations A, B and C. This indicates some
type of problem with queuing of messages. Changes will be made to the
network in part 1 to remedy this situation. 
.H 1 "Part 2 Reports"
.P
The following sections described briefly some of the reports generated
for network described in the second part of the lab. Appendix 6 lists
the input parameters for the part 2 network. The major changes between
network 1 and network 2 are the queue flags are set to YES. This allows
the queuing of messages in case a station in busy.
.H 2 "Utilization Reports"
.P
The utilization reports for network 2 are displayed in appendix 7. The
utilization reports have changed very little from the network 1 case.
.H 2 "Received Message Report"
.P
The final report for part 2 is displayed in appendix 8. This report
lists how many messages were lost by each processor element. For
this network it can be seen that no messages are lost for USR-D. This
is an improvement over network 1.
.H 1 "Conclusions"
.P
Since the network is running at a low utilization, less than 15 percent,
the network is running in a satisfactory way. If the network was 
running at 50 percent or more, then the network would be running in
a region where performance is degrades. Also, the utilization for 
the stations relatively low (about 15 percent) and does not indicate 
a heavy load. Since the network appears satisfactory I chose to 
limit the changes to the network. The only change was to the
queuing of messages.
