A TEMPLATE SHARED-MEMORY CLASS FOR UNIX

I INTRODUCTION

A common architecture for client/server systems is a system process
that monitors a TCP or UDP port for incoming messages, and creates
child processes to service the incoming requests. This type of architecture 
often requires the use of a global memory segment shared among the child
processes and the parent system process. The shared-memory segment can 
contain virtually any type of data, except for pointers to non-shared memory. 

This article describes a class for creating and initializing shared-memory
segments between parent and child processes in the UNIX System V environment. 
Since the shared-memory class uses templates, it allows a user to create a 
shared-memory segment using his class definitions. The shared memory segment 
is initialized and cleared using the user-provided default class constructor 
and class destructor, respectively. The single major restriction to the 
default constructor in the user-defined class is that dynamic allocation 
via new is not allowed since heap memory is not shared between processes.

The class provides for the case of a parent process creating and initializing 
the shared-memory, and child processes attaching to the shared-memory. 
Since there are no restrictions as to which process can read from or write to 
the shared-memory, a semaphore must be provided externally to provide
synchronization among the processes. An example of this procedure is 
demonstrated in the example.

II SYSTEM V SHARED MEMORY ROUTINES

System V provides four routines for creating and maintaining shared memory
segments. They are listed below and brief descriptions are provided.
For more details, please refer to references [1] and [2].

shmget() - obtain a shared memory identifier from the OS. A unique key (created
by the user), the size of the shared memory segment, and permission and 
creation flags are passed as parameters.

shmat() - after the shared memory segment is created using shmget(), the
shared memory segment is attached to the current process using shmat. The
shared memory identifier, address to attach memory segment or NULL, and
a read/write permissions flag are passed as parameters. 

shmdt() - detach the shared memory segment from the process. The shared
memory identifier is passed as a parameter.

shmctl() - execute various shared memory maintenance operations. In this 
case, used to delete the shared memory segment. The shared memory identifier
and the flag IPC_RMID are passed as parameters.

III IMPLEMENTATION

The shared-memory class SharedMemory is implemented as a reference-counted
template data structure. There are two classes, SharedMemory, which provides 
the user interface; and SharedMemoryData, which contains the actual
implementation and is reference-counted.

SharedMemory class is contained in the file vshm5.h, Listing 1. It contains 
one data item, prep, a pointer to a SharedMemoryData object. SharedMemory 
provides three constructors, a destructor, an assignment operator, several 
operators for accessing the shared memory contents, and a static member 
function, removeSharedMemory() for deleting the shared memory segment.

All the SharedMemory constructors and destructor call the SharedMemoryData 
increment and decrement menber functions to increase or decrease the reference
counts, respectively.  Also, if the reference counts drop to zero or less, 
then the SharedMemoryData structure is deleted.

The most important of the constructors is:

	SharedMemory(key_t k, int ne = 1, int m = 0666, void *pa = NULL)

This constructor allows a user to create a array of structures within
the shared memory segment via the parameter ne (number of elements, defaults
to one), set the access permissions via the parameter m (defaults to 0666),
and to define the address to attach the shared memory segment via pa. 
Parameter pa is usually set to NULL which allows the OS to select the address
for attaching the shared memory segment (pa is defaulted to NULL). 

The assignment operator and copy constructor support the reference-counted
idiom in a typical manner. Access operators allow for both const or 
non-const access to the shared memory. Since a member-access operator 
operator->() is provided, the user-provided data type must be an 
aggregate type. To use this class with primitive data types (int, long, 
etc.), at the very least, the member-access operator must be removed or 
ifdef'ed out.

SharedMemoryData class is contained in the file vshm5.h, Listing 1. It 
contains a constructor, destructor, and four member functions for 
maintaining the reference counter.

Of key importance is the constructor of SharedMemoryData. It contains
the code for creating and initializing the shared memory. Referring to 
listing 1, if a valid key is given, then the constructor attempts to 
create the segment using the IPC_EXCL flag. Basically, the IPC_EXCL flag 
demands that the shared memory segment not exist. This call to shmget() 
only works for a parent process which is creating the shared memory segment 
for the first time. All child processes should fail this call, and execute the 
second call to shmget() which does not have the IPC_EXCL flag turned on.
This basic procedure is described in reference [2]. The parent process also 
has the owner flag set to true and the child processes have the owner flag
set to false. The owner flag is important since it determines if the 
constructor and destructor are called. They are called when the owner flag is
true.

The default constructor of the user-defined class is called using the
placement-version of the new operator. For arrays, each element is 
initialized individually, rather than using the array version of new. 
This was necessary since it was discovered that the new operator stores 
some information (array size?) at the beginning of the shared memory. 
This causes the actual space required for say N elements of type Type to 
be greater than N*sizeof(Type). Presumably, since the actual extra space is 
implementation dependent, I chose to initialize the elements individually
to circumvent this problem. Similarly, the user-defined class destructor 
is called individually for each element in the array in the SharedMemoryData
destructor. 

IV EXAMPLE

Files writer.c (Listing 2) and reader.c (Listing 3) contain an example of 
how to use the SharedMemory class. The test code is a reader/writer example. 
It contains two programs, one for the parent process (listing 2) which creates 
and writes into a shared memory segment, and a second program (Listing 3) 
where a child process reads from the shared memory. Two semaphores are used 
to synchronize the reader and writer. The writer starts first, and writes 
in the shared memory. It forks and execs the child process, and blocks until 
the reader process starts and reads the shared memory. The writer and reader 
processes then take turns writing and reading the shared memory, respectively. 

The traditional semaphore P() and V() operations are used for synchronization. 
The semaphore operations are provided using a semaphore class based on System
V semaphores.

The above example and code were all tested on a SUN workstation running 
Solaris 5.5.1 and compiled using the Solaris Workshop C++ compiler, version 
5.0.

V CONCLUSIONS

The results from combining the shared memory class with the semaphore class
used in the test cases, but not described in this article, have been 
very helpful. The use of shared memory is simplified, and initialization is 
reduced to providing a class with an appropriate default constructor and
destructor. 

VI REFERENCES

[1] W. R. Stevens. Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment 
(Addison/Wesley, 1992).

[2] W. R. Stevens. UNIX Network Programming: Interprocess Communications,
Volume II (Prentice Hall, 1999).

[3] S. B. Lippman and J, Lajoie. C++ Primer, Third Edition 
(Addison/Wesley, 1998).

